README.md, before:

Crumsort and Quadsort in C++
============================

![build status](https://github.com/psadda/crumsort-cpp/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg)

This is a C99 to C++17 port of Igor van den Hoven's crumsort and quadsort.

Porting crumsort and quadsort to C++ is not as trivial as one might expect. The original crumsort and quadsort have many C-isms that don't map well to modern C++:

- They take raw pointers as input, not random access iterators. That means they only work for arrays of contiguous memory, like `std::vector`, and not on discontiguous containers, like `std::deque`.
- They use C99 variable length arrays, which are not part of the C++ standard. Some C++ compilers support VLAs as a language extension, but others (MSVC) do not.
- They assume that that the sorted type is [trivial](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TrivialType). That rules out huge swaths of types that you'd probably want to sort, like `std::string` and `std::unique_ptr<T>`.

This respository fixes those all those issues and more, allowing you to use crumsort and quadsort as drop in replacements for `std::sort` and `std::stable_sort`, respectively.

See the original C implementations at [scandum/crumsort](https://github.com/scandum/crumsort) and [scandum/quadsort](https://github.com/scandum/quadsort) for detailed descriptions of the algorithms and their properties.

Example
-------

```cpp
#include "crumsort.hpp"

#include <vector>
#include <functional>
#include <iostream>

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    std::vector<int> list = { 1, 4, 0, 7, 1, 12 };

    scandum::crumsort(list.begin(), list.end(), std::less<int>());

    for (int value : list) {
        std::cout << value << '\n';
    }

    return 0;
}
```

Progress
--------

- [x] Typesafe interface (no `void*`)
- [x] Accept functors as the predicate
- [x] Remove use of C99 VLAs
- [x] Accept any random access iterator (not just raw pointers)
- [x] Support types that are not trivially copyable
- [x] Support types that do not a have a trivial default constructor
- [x] Support types that do not have *any* default constructor
- [x] Support move only types
- [ ] Re-enable optimizations for primitive types
- [ ] Update benchmarks

License
-------

[Unlicense](https://unlicense.org/)

Commit message:

Add benchmark results
* Add simdsort and vqsort to bench.cpp
* Remove parts of bench.cpp that handle differences between C/C++ (since we now always compile as C++)
* Add python script to plot the benchmarks
* Add the plotted results (as PNG images)
* Add writeup of the results
* Check off the "update benchmarks" task in the README. I'm also removing "re-enable optimizations for primitive types" from the todo list because based on the benchmarks I'm not sure it's worth the effort.

README.md, after:

Crumsort and Quadsort in C++
============================

![build status](https://github.com/psadda/crumsort-cpp/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg)

This is a [lightning fast](https://github.com/psadda/crumsort-cpp/blob/main/bench/README.md) C++17 port of Igor van den Hoven's crumsort and quadsort.

Porting crumsort and quadsort to C++ is not as trivial as one might expect. The original crumsort and quadsort have many C-isms that don't map well to modern C++:

- They take raw pointers as input, not random access iterators. That means they only work for arrays of contiguous memory, like `std::vector`, and not on discontiguous containers, like `std::deque`.
- They use C99 variable length arrays, which are not part of the C++ standard. Some C++ compilers support VLAs as a language extension, but others (MSVC) do not.
- They assume that that the sorted type is [trivial](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TrivialType). That rules out huge swaths of types that you'd probably like to be able to sort, like `std::string` and `std::unique_ptr<T>`.

This respository fixes those all those issues and more, allowing you to use crumsort and quadsort as drop in replacements for `std::sort` and `std::stable_sort`, respectively.

Example
-------

```cpp
#include "crumsort.hpp"

#include <vector>
#include <functional>
#include <iostream>

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    std::vector<int> list = { 1, 4, 0, 7, 1, 12 };

    scandum::crumsort(list.begin(), list.end(), std::less<int>());

    for (int value : list) {
        std::cout << value << '\n';
    }

    return 0;
}
```

Benchmarks
----------

Available [here](https://github.com/psadda/crumsort-cpp/blob/main/bench/README.md).

Algorithm
---------

See the original C implementations at [scandum/crumsort](https://github.com/scandum/crumsort) and [scandum/quadsort](https://github.com/scandum/quadsort) for detailed descriptions of the algorithms and their properties.

Progress
--------

- [x] Typesafe interface (no `void*`)
- [x] Accept functors as the predicate
- [x] Remove use of C99 VLAs
- [x] Accept any random access iterator (not just raw pointers)
- [x] Support types that are not trivially copyable
- [x] Support types that do not a have a trivial default constructor
- [x] Support types that do not have *any* default constructor
- [x] Support move only types
- [x] Update benchmarks

License
-------

[Unlicense](https://unlicense.org/)
